# Chapter 3: Numbers & Expressions 
<!-- element style="align-self: center; text-decoration: underline; color: red; background-color: white" -->

##  ^Summary-NumbersAndExpressions

 C++ comes with a wide variety of built in numeric types. There are signed and unsigned integers in five different sizes, as well as three different sizes of floating-point (or real) numbers. In addition, the standard library contains a complex number class, and it is easy to create your own customer numeric types.
 
# I. Integers
##  ^Summary-Integers

Integers are whole numbers; the name is Latin, meaning "whole". Mathematical integers are infinite, but the C++ varieties are finite; each stored in a fixed region of memory.

The sizes for C++ integers are: short, int, long, and long long. C++ does not specify an exact range or representation for the integers. Both are implementation dependent.

* Size cannot decrease as you move from short to int to long to long long.
* int must use at least 2 bytes (16 bits), long must use at least 4 bytes (32 bits), and long long must use at least 8 bytes of storage (64 bits).

On our platform, int is 32 bits, long and long long are both 64 bits. On other platforms (such as Visual C++), long is 32 bits, just like the int.

## A. Signed and Unsigned  `I.`

C++ integers come in two "flavors": signed and unsigned. Unsigned variables offer twice the range of positive values, but cannot store negative numbers. For example, a 32-bit int has a maximum value of 2,147,483,647, while the maximum unsigned int is 4,294,967,295. C++ allows unsigned int to be abbreviated to unsigned.

## B. Literals `I.` 
Explicit values like 235 or -75 are called literals. Integer literal are a sequence of decimal digits, with no spaces or commas allowed, preceded by an optional (+/-) sign. It is stored as a signed int. You may change the representation from signed to unsigned by add a U to the end. You may change the storage from int to long, or to long long by adding an L or an LL. Here are some examples.

^cs150-ch3-slide-1

---

```cpp
auto a = 15;  // signed
auto b == 15L;  // signed decimal long
auto c = 15LL;  // signed decimal long long
auto d = 15UL;  // unsigned decimal long
```
`Integer literals.`

You can also write literals in base 8 (octal), base 16 (hexadecimal) and base 2 (binary).

```cpp
auto oct32 = 040;  // 4 8s and no 0s
auto hex32 = 0x20;  // 2 16s and no 0s
auto bìn = 0b10'0000;  // 1 32 and no 16s, 8s, 4s, 2s or 1s
```

Using `auto` instead  of explicit type to create the variables `a`, `b`, `c`, and `d`, allows the compiler to **infer** types from the initializers. ==**Type inference**== is a new feature of C++11.

# II. Floating-point Numbers
##  ^Summary-FloatingPointNumbers

Numbers with a decimal fraction are called floating-point numbers. They are used to model real numbers from mathematics. C++ has three different floating-point types: float, double, and long double.

`Generally, use double, not float or long double.`

Floating-point literals in C++ are written in two ways:
* Using fixed-point notation (2.0). The value is stored as a double.
* Using scientific or exponential notation (2.9979E+8 to represent the speed of light, instead of writing it as 299790000.) The exponent can be positive or negative and you can use an uppercase or lowercase "E". ^8bd809

You can change the storage of your literals by appending an F for type float and an L for a type long double. Most of the time you will ignore that.

## A. Floating-point Output `II.`
The C++ output objects display floating-point numbers by choosing the representation that is most compact, limiting the default number of digits to 6.

To explicitly set the output format involves 3 steps (only once in your program):
1. Add `#include <iomanip>` to the list of libraries you are using.
2. Send the `fixed` manipulator to the stream before printing any floating-point.

^cs150-ch3-slide-2

---
3. Specify the decimal places to be displayed, using setprecision(n).

Here's an example, displaying the double variable cost with two digits of precision:

```cpp
cout << fixed << setprecision(2) << cost;
```

When printing numbers, you may want to line up the decimal points correctly, so that the output is easier to read. To do that, use setw(width) where width is the width of the column that you want to display. Unlike setprecision(), setw() only applies to one output object. [Here's an example](https://rextester.com/XGHY39126):

```cpp
cout << fixed << setprecision(2); // once (persistent)
cout << "Widget cost: " << setw(10) << cost << endl;
cout << "Sales price: " << setw(10) << price << endl;
```

# III. Expressions & Calculations
##  ^Summary-ExpressionsAndCalculations

To perform calculations, you write expressions to calculate the answer in a form similar to that used in mathematics. Consider the quadratic equation:

$ax^2+bx+c=0$

$x=\frac{-b\pm\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a}$$

```cpp
(-b + sqrt(b * b - 4 * a * c*) / (2 * a*))
```
`A C++ expression`

## A. An Expression Vocabulary `III.`
An expression is any combination of operators and operands which yields a value.
* An ==**operand**== indicates a **value**. Operands include:
	* -> **Literals**: which represent a value
	* -> **Variables**: a storage location containing a value
	* -> **Function calls**: which can produce a value
	* -> **Sub-expressions:** which compute a value

^cs150-ch3-slide-3

---
* An operator is a symbol which performs an operation on one or more operands and, subsequently, produces a value. Operators have three characteristics:
	* -> Arity: the number of operands required. Unary operators require a single operand, binary operators require two.
	* Precedence: determines which operands "bind to" the operator. Those with higher precedence "stick to" their adjacent operands more closely.
	* Associativity: determines whether operations at the same level of precedence should proceed from right-to-left, (called right-associative), or from left-to-right, (called left-associative).

This [linked table](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/operator_precedence) shows the precedence and associativity for all of the C++ operators.

## B. Expression Evaluation `III.`
When operators and operands are evaluated, each operator is applied to its operands, and a temporary value is calculated. This is the result or value of the expression.

```cpp
cout << 10 + 1 << endl;
```
`Expression evaluation`

Let's see how this is evaluated:
1. Four operands: the objects cout and endl, and two int literals, along with three operators: the addition operator and two instances of <<.
2. Addition has higher precedence, so the first result is the temporary value 11.
3. Now we have three operands and two operators at the same precedence. Fall back on associativity (left to right) and evaluate cout << 11.
4. This expression has a side effect (it prints the value 11), but it also produces a result, which is the cout object. The last expression is cout << endl;

See how this works by using parentheses, like this:

```cpp
cout << 10 + 1 << endl;  //Precedence
cout << (10 + 1) << endl; // Associativity, print 11
(cout << 11) << endl;  // Side effect (newline)
cout << endl;
```
`Expression evaluation.`

In C and C++, the order of operation (specified by precedence and associativity) and the order of evaluation are not identical. Here's a simple example:

^cs150-ch3-slide-4

---
When operators and operands are evaluated, each operator is applied to its operands, and a temporary value is calculated. This is the result or value of the expression.

```cpp
x = a() * b() + c();
```
`Order of evaluation.`

Order of operation guarantees that the results of (a() * b()) will be calculated before the addition of c(). However no guarantees are made about the order the functions will be called in: c() could be called first or a() could be called first.

If functions have no side effects (idempotent functions) this doesn't make a difference. If functions have side effects, such as printing, the result is undefined.

# IV. Side Effects & Functions
## ^Summary-SideEffectsAndFunctions

**Most of you are familiar with expressions involving addition, subtraction,** multiplication, and division from Java or Python. However, when it comes to C++ you'll find a few surprises. We want to start this lesson by discussion the differences between ==**integer division**== and normal or ==**true division**==.

Then, we want to take a closer look at assignment and other side-effect operators, such as increment and decrement. We'll finish by talking about evaluating expressions involving different types of operands., and the C++ standard mathematical functions.

## A. Integer Division and Remainders `IV.`
Integer division works like grade-school long division. You draw a little "house" on the
board and put the number you want to divide (called the dividend) inside the house. You
draw the number you want to divide by (the divisor), standing at the front door of the
house like a visitor. You then ask, "how many visitors" could fit inside the house and place
that number on the roof. This is the quotient.

You multiply the quotient by the divisor, place the result beneath the dividend, and sub-
tract. The remainder is anything left over (down in the "basement"), 8 in the example the
student is solving on the board (on the left), and 3 in the example on the callout.

In C++ integer division, the quotient is calculated, and then truncated (not rounded).
The remainder is discarded. With true division, 15/4 would be 3.75 but with integer
division, it's just 3, not 4 as it would be if the 3.75 was rounded.

The % or remainder operator (sometimes called the modulus operator) does exactly
the same thing, except, instead of returning the quotient portion from the roof, it returns
the remainder from the basement.

^cs150-ch3-slide-5

---
# V. Side-Effect Operators
## ^Summary-SideEffectOperators

With the expression `cout` << 11, the `cout` object is changed and the character pair 11 appears on the screen. The change is a side effect. Here are other side-effect operators.

## A. Chained Assignment `V.`
When using the assignment operator, the result or value of the expression is the value
that is copied. Because assignment is right associative, we can "chain" assignment
statements together like this:

```cpp
int x, y, z;
x = y = z = 10;  // Chained assignment
x = y = (z = 10);  // Right associative
x = (y = 10);
x = 10;
```
`Chained assignments`

## B. Shorthand Assignment `V.`
To modify an existing variable, the shorthand-assignment operators let you do that.

```cpp
x += 5;  // x = x + 5
```

## C. Increment and Decrement `V.`
To add or subtract one from a variable use increment (++) and decrement (--). These
are unary operators that can only be applied to a variable (lvalue).
```cpp
int a = 5, b = 10;
a++;  // a is changed to 6
--b;  // b is changed to 9
```
`Increment and decrement statements`

In addition to the side effect, these operators produce a value. When placed before a variable, it is called pre-increment (or decrement);when placed after, it is called a post-increment (or decrement) expression. The side effect is the same for both: the variable is left with a value one greater (or less) than it was before.

The expression value (result) produced depends on whether it is post or pre-increment.

^cs150-ch3-slide-6

---
```cpp
int a = 5, b = 10, c, d;
c = a++;  // a is changed to 6; c is assigned 5
d = --b;  // b is changed to 9 and so is d
```
`Pre/post increment and decrement values.`

With pre-increment, the variable is first modified and the modified variable is returned
as the value. A prefix expression is thus an lvalue, so ++++a is legal.

With post-increment, the original value is saved to a temporary. Then, the variable is
changed. Finally, the temporary is returned from the expression. That's why c is given
the value 5, and not 6. A postfix expression is an rvalue.

## D. A Side-effect Pitfall `V.`

Don't ever use any side-effect operator twice in the same expression, These expressions
all result in undefined behavior. Try it in g++, visual c++ and in clang++.

```cpp
int n = 6;
print(n, ++n);  // 6,7 or 7,7?
int a = n * n++;
n = n++;
cout << n++ << n++ << n++ << endl;
```
`Undefined side-effect values.`

# VI. Mixed Expressions & Type Casts
## ^Summary-MixedExpressionAndTypeCasts

Every expression produces a value, and each value produced has a particular type. Thus, when you add or subtract two integers, the result is an integer. But what if....

```cpp
a = 5 * 3.5;
```
`Mixed-type expressions`

The CPU uses different circuitry for integer and floating-point calculations. To evaluate
this expression, both operands must be type int or they both must be type double. If
we convert both to int, we lose information; converting them to double does not.

When your compiler encounters an expression that uses different types, it determines
the operand with the greatest information potential. It then creates temporaries of
that type, initializing them with the other values. This is called promotion.

^cs150-ch3-slide-7

---
## A. Assignment and Mixed Expressions `VI.`

What is stored in a in the last example? That depends on the type of a. If the variable is other than double, it is implicitly converted into the same type as the variable.
* Widening conversions occur when the assignment causes a promotion, such as from int to double. These will always succeed (as in Java and C#).
* Narrowing conversions occur when the assignment has the potential for loosing information, such as assigning from double to int.

Narrowing assignment conversions are prohibited in Java and C#, but are the default in C++. To turn off implicit narrowing conversions, C++11 added brace or list assignment; this makes C++ work more like Java and C#.

```cpp
int a = 5 * 3.5;  // 17; implicit truncation
int b = {5 * 3.5};  // C++11; compiler error
```
`Assignment and narrowing conversions.`

## B. Type Casts `VI.`
Specify explicit conversions by using a type cast.
```cpp
int num = 5, denom = 7;
double fract1 = num / denom;  // oops! now 0.0
double fract2 = static_cast<double>(num) / denom;
```
`Using static_cast.`

1. `num` and `denom` are both integers
2. `fract1` is a `double`, but the calculation uses `int`, so `fract1` is `0.0`.
3. `static_cast` creates a temporary `double` to "stand in" for `num`, so floating-point division is performed instead of integer division.

There are four of named casts. We'll see others later. Bjarne Stroustrup, (the inventor of C++) has several reasons why you should use these new-style casts on his [C++ FAQ](http://www.stroustrup.com/bs_faq2.html#static-cast).

# VII. Standard Functions
A mathematical function, such as f(x) = x2 + 1 means that ƒ(x) computes a value equivalent to the square of x plus one. For any value x, you can compute the value of the function by applying the formula; thus ƒ(3) is 3 2 + 1, or 10.

^cs150-ch3-slide-8

---
In C++ a **function** is a block of code that has been given a name. To run that code, you ==**call the function**==. To call a function in C++, you write the name of the function, followed by a list of arguments in parentheses. We can implement `f(2.0)` in C++ like this:
```cpp
double f(double x) { return x * x + 1;}
```

When called, the function copies the data supplied as arguments into the appropriate parameter variables (x in this example), and then executes the code in its body. When finished, control returns to the point in the code from which the call was made.

The operation of going back to the calling program is called returning from the function. A function often passes a value back to its caller. This is called returning a value.

## A. The `<cmath>` Library `VII.`
C++ has an extensive standard [mathematical library](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/math) called `<cmath>` that includes many
of the functions you are likely to use. After including the `<cmath>` header, you can use
the functions just like this:

```cpp
double root = sqrt(value);
```
In this case, sqrt is the function, value is the argument passed into the function, and root is where the answer, returned from the function, will be stored. Notice, that unlike Java, we don't use method call syntax to call the math functions in the standard library.

Normally, you'll just look up these functions online. However, you should be able to use `sqrt()`, `abs()` and `pow()` from memory.

# VIII. Finish Up

* Complete the reading exercises (REX) for this chapter.
* Complete homework using the CS50 IDE. Find instructions on Canvas.
	* a. Make sure you submit the assignment using make submit.
	* b.  Make sure you check the CS150 Homework Console to see that your scores got reported, before the beginning of the next lecture.
* Take the pre-class reading quiz on Canvas. You have two attempts.

See you in class or on the Canvas discussion board.

^cs150-ch3-slide-9

---