
# Loops
<!-- element style="align-self: center; text-decoration: underline; color: red; background-color: white" -->

# I. Introducing Loops
## I-Intro-Introducing-Loops
Iteration tions. Iteration is a Computer is also called Science repetition term that or looping. simplyThe means statements repeating that a are set used of ac-
 in
iteration are called loops. Let's start by comparing iteration the if statement.
Both iteration and selection are flow-of-control statements; they control which code is
executed inside your program.
•
 Like the if statement, iteration is based upon evaluating a Boolean
true/false condition, and then performing a set of actions if the test is
true, and skipping them if it is false.
•
 Both loops and if statements have a condition part, (the test), and a body
part, (the actions that are taken).

Selection works like the illustration on the left. Driving down a highway, you come to a
rest stop pull off. When you leave, you rejoin the highway further down the road. Once
you rejoin the highway, you have no opportunity to go back, and revisit the rest stop
again. Those who bypass the turnoff, skip the rest stop altogether.

A loop looks similar, but it not the same. The illustration on the right shows that there is
still a test, but, after you've had your break, the exit road "loops back" (hence the name),
and you rejoin the highway where you initially left it. If you like, you can choose to enter
the rest stop once again, even though the highway is one-way. In this sense, a loop
works a little like a cloverleaf interchange.

^cs150-ch6-slide-1

---
## A. Types of Loops [[cs150-ch6#I. Introducing Loops | `I.`]]
C++ has four loops: while, do-while, and two versions of the for loop. Each is designed
for a particular purpose, and each has a place where it is most effective. One difference
is where the test takes place. The do-while loop makes its test after it has performed
the actions in the loop body at least once. This "test at the bottom" loop is also called an
unguarded loop, because it "leaps before it looks".

The others make their tests before performing the actions in the loop body. These are
called guarded loops, because when the test condition is false, then the actions inside
the loop body are never performed at all.

# II. Counted, Indefinite and Range Loops
Classifying loops according to where their condition is tested is not really very useful
when it comes to deciding which loop to use. It is much more useful to classify loops by
the kind of bounds that they employ.

A loop's bounds are the conditions under which it will repeat its actions. In a simple, loop,
the this might be expressed as "the counter has a value less than ten". In more complex
loops, the bounds may be a combination of conditions. There are three major kinds of
loops that can be built using the basic loop syntax available in C++.

## A. Definite Loops [[cs150-ch6#II. Counted, Indefinite and Range Loops| `II.`]]
A definite or (counter-controlled) loop repeats its actions a fixed number of times--a
"gimme fifty pushups" kind of loop. Ideally you can read the code and tell how many
times the loop will run. Often, though, you often won't know the exact number of repe-
titions until runtime; it may be based upon the number of characters in a string, for
instance, or some other number which is not computed until then.

Here is an example of a counter-controlled loop:
```cpp
for (int i = 10; i <= 20; ++i)
{
cout << i << endl;
}
```

^cs150-ch6-slide-2

---
This kind of loop is also known as a symmetric counter-controlled loop, because both
the lower bounds (10) and the upper bounds (20) are included in the iteration.

## B. Indefinite Loops [[cs150-ch6#II. Counted, Indefinite and Range Loops| `II.`]]
With an indefinite loop you can never tell how many times the loop will repeat by ex-
amining the code. An indefinite loop is a loop that tests for the occurrence of a particular
event, not a count of the number of repetitions.

"Read characters until you encounter a period" is an indefinite loop. The bounds may
be reached after reading three characters, or, after reading three-thousand. It's also
possible that the period might be the first character or might not occur at all.

### 1. Indefinite Categories
Here are three kinds of indefinite bounds; each uses a different sort of bounds:
* Data bounds: a loop that keeps reading until there is no more data. Used when processing files or network data. We'll work extensively with data loops when we get to streams. Here is an indefinite data loop that reads all of the words from a file, represented by input file object named in, and prints each one on its own line:

```cpp
string word;
while (in >> word)
{
cout << word << endl;
}
```

* Sentinel bounds: looks for the presence of a special marker contained within its input. With "read characters until you encounter a period", the period is the sentinel. Sentinel loops are often used in searching, but have other uses as well. This sentinel loop finds the position of the first period entered.

```cpp
int position = 0; char c;
cin >> c;
while (c != '.') // Loop sentinel
{
position++;
cin >> c;
}
```

Limit bounds: end when another repetition of the loop won't get you any closer to your goal. They are often used in scientific calculations and other numeric algorithms, when stating a precise termination condition is not possible. Often this involves monitoring the difference between two variables, and stopping the loop when the difference passes a predetermined threshold. Here is a limit-loop example which counts the number of odd digits in an integer n:

^cs150-ch6-slide-3

---
```cpp
int count = 0;
while (n != 0) // Loop limit
{
if (n % 10 % 2 == 1) { count++; }
n = n / 10;
}
```

## C. Range Loops [[cs150-ch6#II. Counted, Indefinite and Range Loops| `II.`]]
Range (or iterator) loops were added to the language in C++11. Range loops iterate over
a collection of elements, such as a string, array or vector. The shorthand name for a
range loop is a foreach loop. The range-based for loop which looks like this:
```text
for (declaration : expression)
	statement
```

where expression is an object of a type that represents a sequence (such as string),
and declaration defines the variable that is used to access the underlying elements in
the sequence. On each cycle of the loop, the variable in declaration is initialized from
the value of the next element in expression.

Here's a short example, which prints each character in a string on a line by itself:
```cpp
string snake{"Ouroboros"};
for (char c : snake)
{
cout << c << endl;
}
```

On each loop cycle, the variable c is initialized with the next character in the string. When all of the characters have been processed, the loop stops. Thus, you can read this loop as saying for each character in snake, do something. Here's a second example:

```cpp
string str{"one two three"};
int numSpaces{0};
for (char c : str)
{
if (c == ' ') { ++numSpaces; }
}
cout << str << " contains " << numSpaces
<< " spaces." << endl;
```

^cs150-ch6-slide-4

---
If you want to change the characters in the string, then use a reference variable
```cpp
string str{"one two three"};
for (char& c : str)
{
if (c == ' ') { c == '_'; }
}
cout << str << endl;
```

# III. Definite Loops with `for`
## III-Intro-Definite Loops with `for`
**C++ has a loop designed for repeating an operation a definite number of times: the** `for` loop. You already met the ==**range-based**== `for` loop in the last section. In this section we'll cover the traditional ==**classic counter-controlled**== **version**

```cpp
// init:
int i = 0;  // loop variable
// condition:
i < 0;
// update:
i++
```
range-based for loop in the last section. In this section we'll cover
the traditional classic counter-controlled version.

## A. A Definite Loop Pattern [[cs150-ch6#III. Definite Loops with `for`]]
The pattern used when you simply want to repeat an action n times is this:
```text
times <- times to repeat
i <- 0
While i is less than times
	Do action
	i <- i + 1
```

Here is this pattern translated into C++ using the `for` loop.
```cpp
int times = 5; // repeat 5 times
for (int i = 0; i < times; ++i)
{
cout << "Hello" << endl;
}
```

The traditional for loop has three sections inside its parentheses:
* The initialization expression is evaluated once before the loop is entered. It creates and initializes the loop control variable, often named `i`. You may create other variables of the same time. These variables have statement scope; they are not available after the loop body. It ends with a semicolon.
* The test condition is evaluated after the initialization. If `true`, the body is entered; if `false`, it is skipped. The condition also ends in a semicolon.

^cs150-ch6-slide-5

---
* The ==**update expression**== is evaluated **after** the loop body is completed. It does not end in a semicolon. It must change something in the condition, which is evaluated again, immediately following the update.

Often, the **index** or **loop control variable** is not used inside the body of the loop; it simply controls the number of repetitions. Single letter names such as `i` and `j` are common. The here goes from `0` to ==less-than== `n`, so we say that this loop uses ==**asymmetric bounds**==.

## B. Sequences [[cs150-ch6#III. Definite Loops with `for`]]
A second idiomatic variation is used to count from one value to another:
```cpp
for (int var = start; var <= finish; ++var)
```

In this for loop the actions in the body are executed with the variable var set to each
value between start and finish, inclusive. We say that the bounds are symmetric.
Use this loop to count from 1 to 100:
```cpp
for (int i = 1; i <= 100; ++i)
```

In this pattern, the loop variable is used to produce a sequence of data.
```cpp
int factorial(int n)
{
	int result = 1;
	for (int i = 1; i <= n; ++i) { result *= i; }
	return result;
}
```

This example uses the loop to implement the factorial function, the product of the inte-
gers between 1 and n. The for loop variable i counts from 1 to n. The body of the loop
updates result by multiplying it by i.

## C. Counting Down [[cs150-ch6#III. Definite Loops with `for`]]
Here's a loop that counts down, not up:

```cpp
for (int n = 10; n >= 0; --n)
{
cout << n << ' ';
}
cout << endl;
```
```text
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
```

^cs150-ch6-slide-6

---
Each of the expressions in a for statement is optional, but the semicolons must appear. If the initialization expression is missing, no initialization is performed. If the test-condition is missing, it is assumed to be true. If update-step is missing, no action occurs between loop cycles.

## D. Processing Strings [[cs150-ch6#III. Definite Loops with `for`]]
One use of the for loop is to process strings. The for loop, and the asymmetric bounds
pattern are ideal, because the subscripts use by strings and arrays all begin at 0, and
the last element is always found at size() – 1.

### 1) Processing Single Characters [[cs150-ch6#III. Definite Loops with `for` | `III. D.`]]
The canonical classic for loop to process every character in a string, should look
something like this:
```cpp
for (size_t i = 0, len = str.size(); i < len; ++i)
{
char c = str.at(i);
}
```

Note that the string size() member function returns an unsigned type. If you are not
careful, that can lead to unexpected results like this:
```cpp
for (auto i = str.size() - 1; i >= 0; --i)
```

This loop intended to count down from the last character to the first at index 0. However, if str is an empty string, then i starts at the largest possible unsigned number, instead of -1 because i is an unsigned type, the condition i >= 0 can never be false, so you can never exit the loop.

Here is a solution to this problem that performs correctly:
```cpp
for (auto i = str.size(); i > 0; --i)
{
auto c = str.at(i - 1);
}
```

Alternatively, you can store str.size() in an int variable, as long as you are sure that the string you are processing is no longer than the positive range of an int. Avoid this because then you have a potential bug in your code when strings get large.

^cs150-ch6-slide-7

---
### 2) A Bad Habit [[cs150-ch6#III. Definite Loops with `for` | `III. D.`]]
You may see the idiomatic loop written like this:
```cpp
for (size_t i = 0; i < str.size(); i++)
	// do something with s[i] or s.at(i)
```

This is a bad habit which assumes that calling size() is "free" that is, it executes in constant time and there is no overhead for calling the function. This is close to true for string::size(), but it is not true for all functions. Don't train your fingers to do that.

Even worse is combining this bad habit with int indexes, like this:
```cpp
for (int i = 0; i < str.size(); i++)...
```

The comparison i < str.size()automatically converts i to unsigned. If i ever becomes negative, it is compared as if it were a very large positive number. Your compiler may warn you if you mix signed and unsigned numbers like this, but it's easier to remember: Just don't do it!

Since size() never changes in the loop, store the length in a variable, and use the variable in your test. Here is an example using int, but you should do the same thing even if you use size_t (which is better).
```cpp
for (int i = 0, len = str.size(); i < len; i++) ...
```

A minor problem with using int, is that, theoretically, strings can be very large; larger than the largest possible int.

### 3) Counting Vowels [[cs150-ch6#III. Definite Loops with `for` | `III. D.`]]
As an example, let's **count the number of lower-case vowels** in a `string`. Click the [running man link](https://codecheck.it/files/2011181901er23fz7pevdredkf1ou63v28p) to open the **CodeCheck** editor and give it a try.
1. I have already written a portion of the function skeleton for you. Since the function returns an int, you just need to create the result variable, initialize it to zero, and return it at the end of the function.
2. Next, use the canonical classic for loop (from the previous page) to process and retrieve every character in the string. You should memorize this pattern so that it is always at your fingertips when required.
3. Finally, check the character to see if it is one of aeiou. If it is, then count it.

^cs150-ch6-slide-8

---
## E. Processing Substrings [[cs150-ch6#III. Definite Loops with `for`]]
==**Processing substrings**== requires a little more work than processing individual characters. Let's complete a function, countSubs(), which counts the number of times that one `string`, `s2`, appears inside another, `s1`. Click the [running man](https://codecheck.io/files/2107071824am5o6ix9z0rbjxreo3xmd84sj) to try it in **CodeCheck**.

Complete the stub by adding a variable to hold the count, and then return it. Your code should now compile and run. You might even get a few correct.

```cpp
int countSubs(const string& s1, const string& s2)
{
	int count{0};
	. . .
	return count;
}
```

To extract a substring from a string str, you use the code:
```cpp
string subs = s1.substr(index, count);
```

The variable index is the position you want to start extracting from, and count is the
number of characters to extract. However, if index is on the last character, and count
is greater than 1

Instead, let's think about the loop in a different way. You need to loop through s1,
extracting each three-character substring, and comparing it to s2. Rather than writing
a for loop with index refer to the beginning of the substring, you can have it point to
the element following the substring, and then extract the characters preceding in-
dex.

If we suppose s1 is "catapult" and s2 is "tap", here is how that looks:

Your loop becomes very easy to write:
```cpp
int count{0};  // times s2 found in s1
size_t slen{s2.size()};  // size of string looking for
for (size_t i = slen, len = s1.size(); i <= len; ++i)
{
	string subs = s1.substr(i - slen, slen);
	. . .
}
```

^cs150-ch6-slide-9

---

Things to notice about this loop:
* The loop index (i) starts at slen, where slen is the size of the substring you intend to extract. It does not start at 0.
* When calling substr(index, count), the index is i-slen, which means you are extracting the characters before i, not after it.
* Since i points to the first position past your substring, the loop condition is not i < len, but i <= len (Make sure you don't confuse len and slen).

All that's left to do is compare `subs` to `s2` and update your counter. With C++ strings, you can use `\==`; you don't need to use an `equals()` method as you would with Java.

# IV. Sentinel Loop Patterns
## IV-Intro-Sentinel-Loop-Patterns
How do you handle problems where the loop reads data from the user until some special value, or sentinel, is found to signal the end of the input? This is called a sentinel loop and its logical structure is:

```text
Read a value
If the value is equal to the sentinel Then
	Exit the loop
Process the value
```

There is no easy test at the beginning of the loop; you don't know when the sentinel is encountered until you've read a value. There are three ways to rearrange the statements to handle this situation.

## A. The Primed Loop Pattern [[cs150-ch6#IV. Sentinel Loop Patterns | `IV.`]]
The primed-loop pattern is named after the old-west water pump which required users to pour water down the well to establish suction, before pumping began.
```text
Prompt user and read in a value.
While value is not the sentinel
	Process the data value.
	Prompt user and read next value
```

This is the classic way to process sentinel data. The code used to read each data value is duplicated, before the loop and at the end of the loop.

^cs150-ch6-slide-10

---
Here's a primed-sentinel-loop that sums a sequence, using 0 as the sentinel:
```cpp
cout << "Add integers. Enter 0 when done." << endl;
int total = 0, value = -1;
cout << "> ";
cin >> value;  // Read before the loop
while (value != 0)  // Check for the sentinel
{
total += value;  // No sentinel? Process
cout << "> ";  // Prompt and read next item
cin >> value;
}
cout << "Total: " << total << endl;
```

## B. The loop-and-a-half Pattern [[cs150-ch6#IV. Sentinel Loop Patterns | `IV.`]]
Another way to write a sentinel loop is to use the break statement, which has the effect of immediately terminating the nearest enclosing loop. With break you code the loop in a form that follows the natural structure: the read-until-sentinel pattern:
```cpp
While True
	Prompt user and read value
	If value == sentinel Then
		break out of the loop
	Process the value
```

This is an endless loop, where the only way to exit is by executing the break statement. Here's the same problem, using the loop-an-a-half pattern:
```cpp
while (true)  // Endless loop
{
cout << "> ";  // Prompt and read item
cin >> value;
if (value == 0) break;  // Sentinel? Leave loop
total += value;  // No sentinel? Process
}
```

^cs150-ch6-slide-11

---
## C. The Flag-controlled Pattern [[cs150-ch6#IV. Sentinel Loop Patterns | `IV.`]]

A third way to implement the **read-until-sentinel** pattern is to use a ==**flag-controlled**== loop, where you introduce an additional **Boolean** variable just before the loop starts and set it to **false**. Inside the loop you read a data value and check the sentinel, just as in the loop-and-a-half.

Instead of a `break` statement, set your flag variable to `true` when the sentinel is read. Otherwise, you process that data value as normal:

```text
Let flag be False
While flag is False
	Prompt user and read value
	If value == sentinel Then
		Let flag be True
	Else
		Process the value
```

Which version ==**should**== you use? Eric Roberts 1 suggests that empirical studies demonstrate that students are more ==**likely to write correct programs if they use the loop-and-a-half version**== than if they are forced to use some other strategy.

If you're interested, follow the link below to find Roberts' paper.

# V. Finish Up
* Complete the ==**reading exercises**== **(REX)** for this chapter.
* Complete the ==**homework**== using the **CS50 IDE**. The link is on Canvas.
	* a. Make sure you submit the assignment using `make submit`.
	* b. Make sure you check the [CS150 Homework Console](https://cs170-console.appspot.com/) to see that your scores got reported, before the beginning of the next lecture.
* Take the **pre-class reading quiz** on Canvas. You have two attempts.

See you in class or on the Canvas discussion board.

^cs150-ch6-slide-12

---