
# Characters and Strings
<!-- element style="align-self: center; text-decoration: underline; color: red; background-color: white" -->

# I. Characters and Strings

## I-Intro-CharactersAndStrings
Individual char (usually characters pronounced in"tchar", C++ are not represented "kar"). In memory, by the these data values type are named repre sented by assigning each character an 8-bit integer code called an ASCII code.
You write character literals by enclosing each character in single quotes. Thus, the lit-
eral 'A' represents the internal code of the uppercase letter A. In addition, C++ allows
you to write special characters in a multi-character form beginning with a back-slash
(\). This form is called an escape sequence.
Examples include the newline (\n), the tab (\t), and a double-quote inside a string literal
(\"). Here are the escape sequences that C++ supports.

## A. Character Functions [[cs150-ch5#I. Characters and Strings | `I.`]]
It is useful to have tools for working with individual characters. The `<cctype>` header
contains a variety of functions that do that. There are two kinds of functions.
* Predicate classification functions test whether a character belongs to a particular category. Calling isdigit(ch) returns true if ch is one of the digit characters in the range between '0' and '9'. Similarly, isspace(ch) returns true if ch is any of the characters that appear as white space on a display screen, such as spaces and tabs.
* Conversion macros make it easy to convert between uppercase and lowercase letters. Calling toupper('a'), for example, returns the character 'A'. If the argument is not a letter, the function returns it unchanged, so that tolower('7') returns '7'.

## B. Selecting Characters [[cs150-ch5#I. Characters and Strings | `I.`]]
Positions in a string are numbered (or indexed) starting at 0. The characters in the
string "hello, world" are numbered like:

^cs150-ch5-slide-1

---
The numbers called the index or subscript; they must be positive (unlike Python where
subscripts can be negative). Indexes start at 0 because it represents how many places
you need to travel from the beginning if the string to get to the element you are inter-
ested in. To retrieve the 'e', you have to travel one character from the beginning.

The `<string>` library has four ways to select characters from a non-empty string:
* Use the subscript operator like this: cout << str[0];
* Use the member function at() like this: cout << str.at(0);
* Use the members front() and back() in C++ 11s: cout << str.front();

If the string variable str contains "hello, world", all of these expressions refer to
the character 'h' at the beginning of the string.

The at() member function makes sure the index is in range; the subscript operator
does not. What happens when a subscript is out of range is undefined. You should gen-
erally use at() (similar to charAt() in Java).

### 1) Modifying Characters [[cs150-ch5#I. Characters and Strings#B. Selecting Characters cs150-ch5 I. Characters and Strings `I.`| `I. B.`]]
Selecting an individual character in a string returns a reference to the character in the
string instead of a copy of that character. This is different than Java's charAt(). You
may assign a new value to that reference. For example:
```cpp
str[0] = 'H';
str.at(0) = 'H';
```

Both lines change the value from "hello, world" to "Hello, world".

## C. Substrings [[cs150-ch5#I. Characters and Strings | `I.`]]
To create a new string, initialized with only a portion of an existing string (called a
substring), use the member function named substr() which takes two parameters:
* the index of the first character you want to select
* the desired number of characters.

Calling str.substr(start, n) creates a new string by extracting n characters from
str starting at the index position specified by start. For example, if str contains the
string "hello, world", then this prints the three-character substring "ell".
```cpp
string str{"hello, world"};
```

^cs150-ch5-slide-2

---
```cpp
cout << str.substr(1, 3) << endl;
```

C++ begin at 0, so the character at index position 1 is the character 'e'.

Be careful with the substr() function, when switching between Java and C++. In

 Java, end() the iterator second in C++). parameter In C++, to though, its substring() it is the number method of is characters the ending in index the returned
 (like the
substring. This can lead to hard-to-find bugs (and crashes).

The second argument in the substr() member function is optional; if missing, sub-
str() returns the substring that starts at the index and continues to the end:

```cpp
string str{"hello, world"};
cout << str.substr(7) << endl;
```

This returns the string "world". The fragment below uses substr() to print the sec-
ond half of str, which includes the middle character if the size of str is odd:

```cpp
string str{"hello, world"};
cout << str.substr(str.size() / 2) << endl;
```
 
> [!note] 
 When only than up nusing characters to the the end substr(start, follow of the the original specified string, end) starting version instead position, of of substr(), causing substr() a if runtime n is returns supplied error. characters
 but If,fewer
 how-
ever, start is beyond the length of the string, you will get an error.

## D. Searching a string [[cs150-ch5#I. Characters and Strings | `I.`]]
To search for both characters and substrings, the string class contains a member func-
tion find(), which comes in several forms. The simplest form looks like this:
```cpp
str.find(T target);
```

The argument target
 T may be a string or a char or
a string literal. The function searches through str looking for the first occurrence of
target. If it is found, find() returns the index at which the match begins. If you want
to find the last occurrence of target, use rfind() instead.

If target is not found, then find()returns the constant named string::npos. This is
defined as part of the string class and therefore requires the string:: qualifier. This
is a good candidate for a named constant in your code:

```cpp
const auto NOT_FOUND = string::npos;
```

^cs150-ch5-slide-3

---
The find() member function takes an optional second argument to indicate the index
at which to start. Both styles of the find() member function are illustrated here:
```cpp
string str{"hello, world"};
auto a = str.find('o');  // char, 4
auto b = str.rfind("o");  // string, 8
auto c = str.find('l', 4);  // 10
auto d = str.find("waldo");  // string::npos
```

The find() member functions consider uppercase and lowercase characters to be dif-
ferent. Unlike Java, there is no built-in toUpperCase() or toLowerCase() member
function in the string class.

## E. Other Forms [[cs150-ch5#I. Characters and Strings | `I.`]]
In addition to find() and rfind(), you can find the position of the first (or last) occur-
rence of a character that appears in a set or that doesn't appear in a set. Here are
some examples:
```cpp
string s{"\"Hooray\", the crowd cheered!"};
auto a = s.find_first_of("aeiou"); // first lc vowel
auto b = s.find_last_of("\",.!:;"); // last punctuation
auto c = s.find_first_not_of(" \t\n"); // non-whitespace
```

# II. Reference Types
## II-Intro-Reference-Types
Library are called types, value like types. string, In C++ and such the built-in variables primitive are "boxes" types, that like contain int and data.
 double,
C++ also has several derived types:
* pointers, which contain the address of a variable,
* arrays, which contain a sequence of variables
* references, which provide an alias or alternate name for an existing variable

A reference name is an alternate name for an existing object. An alias
an example of a variable n and its alias r.
```cpp
int n = 3;
int& r = n; // r is an alias for n
r = 42;  // n is also now 42
```

^cs150-ch5-slide-4
 
---
Here, r is simply an alternate name for n. It is not a new variable. Under the hood, the
compiler implements references using pointers. However, even if you understand how
pointers work, you should try not to get the two concepts confused.

## A. No Conversions [[cs150-ch5#II. Reference Types| `II.`]]
Unlike value-type variables, references have no implicit conversions. For instance, the
following code will not compile, because x is an int, but rx is a reference to a double. If
rx were a double instead of a double& then x would be promoted and stored in rx.
int x = 3;
double& rx = x;
 // ILLEGAL; x is not a double

## B. Constant References [[cs150-ch5#II. Reference Types| `II.`]]
References must refer to an lvalue of exactly the same type, but constant references
may refer to literals or temporary values. Here are some examples:
```cpp
int& lit = 3;
 // ILLEGAL
const int& lit2 = 3;
 // OK
string& str = "OK";
 // ILLEGAL
const string& str2 = "OK";
 // OK
```

## C. Reference Parameters [[cs150-ch5#II. Reference Types| `II.`]]
When you pass a variable to a function, the function receives a copy of the calling
value or argument. Assigning to a parameter variable changes the parameter but has
no effect on the argument. Consider this function to set a variable to zero:
```cpp
void toZero(int var)
{
var = 0;
}
```

If you call the procedure like this:
```cpp
setToZero(x);
```

the parameter variable named var is initialized with a copy of whatever value is
stored in x. Making a copy of arguments when calling a function, is known as pass by
value or call by value, and the parameter x is known as a value parameter.

The assignment statement var = 0; inside the function sets the parameter variable
var to 0 but leaves x unchanged in the calling program.

^cs150-ch5-slide-5

---
If you want to change the value of the calling argument, you can change the parame-
ter from a value parameter into a reference parameter by adding an ampersand be-
tween the type and the name in the function header:
```cpp
void toZero(int& var)
{
var = 0;
}
```

Unlike value parameters, reference parameters are not copied. Instead, the function
treats var as a reference to the original variable, which means that the memory
used for that variable is shared between the function and its caller.

## D. String Parameters [[cs150-ch5#II. Reference Types| `II.`]]
Reference parameters don't make a copy, so they are much more efficient when
copying a class-type argument such as the string. Whenever you pass a string as
an argument to a function, use const string& for the parameter if the function will not
modify the calling argument, and simply string& if it will.

You can add these C++11 type alias declarations to your programs if you like:
```cpp
using stringIn = const string&; // input string
using stringRef = string&;  // output string
```

C++17 added the string_view type which may be even more efficient for some input
string operations. However, it also has several pitfalls, so I'd suggest sticking to these
rules until you are more experienced.

# III. Finish Up
* Complete the reading exercises (REX) for this chapter.
* Complete the homework using the CS50 IDE. The link is on Canvas.
	* a. Make sure you submit the assignment using make submit.
	* b. Make sure you check the CS150 Homework Console to see that your scores got reported, before the beginning of the next lecture.
* Take the pre-class reading quiz on Canvas. You have two attempts.

See you in class or on the Canvas discussion board.

^cs150-ch5-slide-6

---
